.Dd June 27, 2023
.Dt libgetargv++ 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm libgetargv++
.Nd library functions for getting and printing other processes' args
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libgetargv++
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In libgetargv++.hpp
.Vt struct GetArgvOptions { int skip; pid_t pid; bool nuls; };
.Vt struct ArgvArgcResult { char* buffer; char** argv; uint argc; };
.Vt struct ArgvResult     { char* buffer; char* start_pointer; char* end_pointer; };
.Ft bool
.Fn get_argv_of_pid "const struct GetArgvOptions* options" "struct ArgvResult* result"
.Ft bool
.Fn get_argv_and_argc_of_pid "pid_t pid" "struct ArgvArgcResult* result"
.Ft bool
.Fn print_argv_of_pid "char* start_pointer" "char* end_pointer"
.Ft void
.Fn free_ArgvResult "struct ArgvResult* result"
.Ft void
.Fn free_ArgvArgcResult "struct ArgvArgcResult* result"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.No The first and only library to provide a correct interface to the Dv KERN_PROCARGS2 No sysctl. Every other program/library Po including Apple's Xr ps 1 Pc incorrectly indexes the arguments while parsing, in the case of empty leading arguments; resulting in the inclusion of env vars in addition to arguments. This is because while it is conventional to put the executable name in Va argv[0] , No it is not enforced by xnu (the kernel), however everyone else relies on it being true.
.Pp
.Fn get_argv_of_pid No takes as arguments: a pointer to a Ft struct GetArgvOptions No which controls: whether the Dv NUL Ns s which separate the arguments in Va argv No are replaced with spaces Po .nuls = true Pc , No how many leading arguments to skip Po .skip = # Pc , No and the Ar pid No to target Po .pid = # Pc ; No and a pointer to a Ft struct ArgvResult Ns . The results of the function are populated in the Fa result No struct: Po .start_pointer Pc is a pointer to the start of the Va argv Po skipped ahead by as many args as requested Pc , Po .end_pointer Pc is a pointer to the end of the Va argv , Po .buffer Pc is the entire raw buffer which it is the caller's responsibility to Xr free 3 Po you can use Fn free_ArgvResult No to ensure you use the matching Xr free 3 No function to this library's Xr malloc 3 No function Pc . The return value of the function is a boolean indicating success Po true Pc or failure Po false Pc ; in case of failure Xr errno 2 No is set, and the buffer pointer in Fa result Ns , is set to Dv NULL . \&In No the case where there are no arguments to return Po .argc == 0 Pc or Po .skip == argc Pc then .start_pointer, .end_pointer, and .buffer are set to Dv NULL . Use Fn get_argv_and_argc_of_pid No if you want to inspect the results and not just print them.
.Pp
.Fn get_argv_and_argc_of_pid No is an alternative to Fn get_argv_of_pid No which returns the Fa argc No and Fa argv No of a Ar pid Ns , with Fa argv No formatted as a Ft char** Ns , just like if it was passed to Fn main Ns . \&It takes as arguments a Ft pid_t Fa pid , No and a pointer to an Ft ArgvArgcResult No struct which will be populated with the Fa argc No and Fa argv No of the Ar pid Ns , and the backing buffer from the sysctl. \&It is the caller's responsibility to Xr free 3 No the backing buffer Po .buffer Pc and the Po .argv Pc array  Po you can use Fn free_ArgvArgcResult No to ensure you use the matching Xr free 3 No function to this library's Xr malloc 3 No function Pc , except when argc is 0 in which case the buffer and argv array are set to Dv NULL . The return value of the function is a Vt bool No indicating success Po true Pc or failure Po false Pc ; in case of failure Xr errno 2 No is set, and the pointers in Fa result No are set to Dv NULL .
.Pp
.Fn print_argv_of_pid No is a convenience function that will print to stdout every byte from Fa start_pointer No to Fa end_pointer , No including Dv NUL Ns s, in a performant way. Its return value is a Vt bool No indicating success Po true Pc or failure Po false Pc ; on failure Xr errno 2 is set. If Ar start_pointer No or Ar end_pointer No are Dv NULL pointers Po note: not Dv NUL bytes Pc , or both point to the same address, or Fa end_pointer No is greater than Fa start_pointer No then nothing is printed.
.Pp
.Fn free_ArgvResult No is a safe way to Xr free 3 No the pointer in a Ft struct ArgvResult No using the matching Xr free 3 No function to the Xr malloc 3 No that allocated the buffer it holds a pointer to. This function does not return a value.
.Pp
.Fn free_ArgvArgcResult No is a safe way to Xr free 3 No the pointers in a Ft struct ArgvArgcResult No using the matching Xr free 3 No function to the Xr malloc 3 No that allocated the buffers it holds pointers to. This function does not return a value.
.Sh ERRORS
In addition to the errors documented for the
.Xr sysctl 3
and
.Xr write 2
system calls, the functions in
.Nm
.Pq except the free_Argv*Result functions
may return false to indicate failure, and set
.Xr errno 2
as described below:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
Targeted pid's args either are not NUL-terminated or there were none despite pid's argc being > 0, essentially the system is in an invalid state and should be rebooted ASAP as the kernel is producing garbage output.
.It Bq Er ESRCH
The targeted pid doesn't exist.
.It Bq Er EPERM
User doesn't have permission to see targeted pid's args.
.It Bq Er ENAMETOOLONG
Targeted pid's args are too long (somehow longer than ARG_MAX) and cannot be parsed safely.
.It Bq Er ERANGE
Function was asked to skip more args than targeted pid has.
.El
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
.No I believe Nm No is thread-safe under the following conditions: Xr errno 2 No is thread-local, Fn malloc No is thread safe, Fn sysctl No is thread safe, as is copying out of the buffer it populates; these conditions are met on all macOS versions I've tested. Note: the arguments passed into the functions in Nm No must not be modified (or freed) by other threads until after the functions return. Whether you use thread-local storage, or mutexes, or some other synchronization primitive, or separate blocks of shared memory, or some other approach, is up to you. Also note that: calling Fn print_argv_of_pid No from multiple threads may interleave the output, so you may want to use Fn flockfile stdout No to prevent this.
.Sh PERFORMANCE
.No I've spent a lot of time optimizing the performance of this library. All functions use the most efficient algorithm possible, and the fewest memory allocations possible. I've also benchmarked the functions I use from the C std library in order to choose the most optimized versions available. I regularly benchmark my code using hyperfine to test for performance regressions.
.Pp
.No The Fn get_argv_and_argc_of_pid No function may be slower than Fn get_argv_of_pid No as it must perform an additional Fn malloc Ns , though it has fewer conditionals per loop so if there are few arguments then it could wind up being faster. Both functions have the same time complexity: Fn O n No where Fa n No is the length of the arguments to pid in bytes.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following programs show minimal use of the entire library API.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
.so test/src/libtest1.c
.Ed
\l'80─'
.Bd -literal -offset indent
.so test/src/libtest2.c
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getargv 1 ,
.Xr ps 1 ,
.Xr errno 2 ,
.Xr sysctl 3 ,
.Xr stdbool.h 0p ,
.Xr free 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm
library conforms to the xnu kernel's
.Dv KERN_PROCARGS2
sysctl.
.Sh LIST OF FUNCTIONS
.Bl -column "Function" "Description"
.It Sy "Function" Ta Sy "Description"
.It Li "get_argv_of_pid" Ta "get the argv of the specified pid as a buffer"
.It Li "get_argv_and_argc_of_pid" Ta "get the argc and argv of the specified pid in standard format"
.It Li "print_argv_of_pid" Ta "print a contiguous stretch of memory to stdout, including any NULs"
.It Li "free_ArgvResult" Ta "free the pointer in an ArgvResult struct using the correct free function"
.It Li "free_ArgvArgcResult" Ta "free the pointers in an ArgvArgcResult struct using the correct free function"
.El
.Sh BUGS
.No This library does not necessarily interact well with other libraries due to unilaterally defining Vt bool No if In stdbool.h isn't available. This is only a problem when compiling C in std < St -isoC-99 . If you do experience a conflict, you can remove the definition of bool from the header, so long as you only include the header after you define bool in your program.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES

.Bl -bullet
.It
.No The current implementation of Fn print_argv_of_pid No does not facilitate printing to anything other than Va stdout .
.It
.No The current implementations of Fn get_argv_of_pid No and Fn get_argv_and_argc_of_pid No allocate memory, and do not facilitate alternate allocators.
.It
.No The current implementations of Fn get_argv_of_pid No and Fn get_argv_and_argc_of_pid No assume that you have not compiled your own xnu kernel with a custom Dv PID_MAX Ns ; if you have, you will need to compile
.Nm
.No with your custom Dv PID_MAX No set thus:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ make PID_MAX=__YOUR_CUSTOM_PID_MAX_HERE__ dylib
.Ed
.Pp
.No Also, it is currently a hard requirement that Dv PID_MAX No < Dv ARG_MAX Ns .
.El
